bringing a gm crop to market can be both expensive and time consuming , and agricultural bio - technology companies can only develop products that will provide a return on their investment ( ramaswami , pray , & lalitha , 2012 ) . for these companies , patent infringement is a big issue . the price of gm seeds is high and it may not be affordable to small farmers ( ramaswami et al . , 2012 ; qaim , 2009 ) . a considerable range of problems has been associated with gm crops , including debt and increased dependence on multinational seed companies , but these can also be combined with other agricultural technologies to some extent ( kloppenburg , 1990 ; finger et al . , 2011 ) . the majority of seed sales for the world major crops are controlled by a few seed companies . the issues of private industry control and their intellectual property rights over seeds have been considered problematic for many farmers and in particular small farmers and vulnerable farmers ( fischer , ekener - petersen , rydhmer , & edvardsson bjornberg , 2015 ; mosher & hurburgh , 2010 ) . in addition , efforts by gm seed companies to protect their patented seeds through court actions have created financial and social challenges for many farmers ( marvier & van acker , 2005 ; semal , 2007 ) . there is considerable debate about the extent to which gm crops bring additional value to small and vulnerable farmers with strong opinions on both sides ( park , mcfarlane , phipps , & ceddia , 2011 ; brooke & barfoot , 2010 ; james , 2010 ; smale et al . , 2009 ; subramanian & qaim , 2010 ) . as the reliance on gm seeds extends , concerns grow about control over the food supply via seed ownership and the impacts on the diversity of seed sources , which can impact the resilience of farming systems across a region ( key et al . , 2008 ) . the risk of gm crops to the world economy can be significant . global food production is dominated by a few seed companies , and they have increased the dependence of developing countries on industrialized nations ( van acker , cici , michael , ryan , & sachs , 2015 ) .