in hindsight , during follow - up analysis into the handling of the sars epidemic , excessive use of ventilators in intensive care icu wards was recognized as having contributed to ventilator - associated pneumonia ( vap ) , and an increase in bacterial contamination . while it is true that extensive sterilization procedures will certainly factor into the dominance of hospital staph infections , chiefly , mrsa , vaccines on the immunization schedule like prevnar , the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine pcv are more immediately responsible for seeding an entire generation with the mrsa . therefore , it is my belief that the sars infection carried a viral - bacterial hybrid , and that the new covid - 19 sequence contains an underlying bacterial component , methicillin - resistant staphylococcus aureus : ' the mrsa acquisition rate was also increased : it was 3 . 53 % ( 3 . 53 cases per 100 admissions ) during the pre - sars period , 25 . 30 % during the sars period , and 2 . 21 % during the post - sars period ( p < . 001 ) . the vap rate was high , at 36 . 5 episodes per 1000 ventilator - days , and 47 % of episodes were caused by mrsathere were 30 episodes of vap in 22 patients , for a rate of 36 . 5 episodes per 1000 ventilator - days . this is much higher than the 90th percentile distribution for medical icus ( 9 . 6 episodes per 1000 ventilator - days ) or medical - surgical icus in major teaching hospital ( 12 . 1 per 1000 ventilator - days ) in the nnis system [ 11 ] . most of the organisms causing vap were mrsa ( 47 . 1 % of isolate ) , followed by stenotrophomonas species ( 29 . 4 % ) and acinetobacter species ( 14 . 7 % ) . during the sars period , there was a significant increase in the frequency of isolation of mrsa , stenotrophomonas species , and candida species and a significant decrease in the frequency of isolation of pseudomonas and klebsiella species . there were no differences among the 3 time periods , pre - sars , sars , and post - sars . . . infection control measures , in particular , were upgraded , including use of enhanced personal protective equipment ( pe ) and more rigorous environment cleansing and disinfection . infection control measures placed heavy emphasis on use of pe because of the high rate of transmission of sars to health care workers . routinely used pe included n95 respirators ; face shields ; caps ; long - sleeved , disposable gown ; and gloves . for high - risk procedures , such as intubation and resuscitation , goggles were also used . ' fast forward to 2020 . the same sterilization measures have been carried out in triage units and icu to help combat covid - 19 . by extension , mrsa cross - contamination will follow , including the appearance of mycoplasma , the insidious primitive form of bacterium , which is substantially more pernicious on our heath .