this virus aggressively targets an enzyme in the body called ace2 or angiotensin - converting enzyme 2 , which protects those suffering from hypertension , diabetes , kidney impairment or cardiovascular disease from succumbing to total respiratory collapse . the virus docks onto the enzyme and begins replicating itself , overtaking and inhibiting the respiratory system properties in the process . ' the virus enters the host cell , and the uncoated genome is transcribed and translated . the mrna form a unique " nested set " sharing a common 3 ' end . new virions form by budding from host cell membranes . ' the latest configuration of corona represents a triple weaponized threat : to mature stage adults with pre - existing medical conditions and compromised immunity . it is reminiscent of the t - cell disrupting agent which suddenly manifested in 1978 , eventually found to be inserted in the experimental small pox vaccine designated for africa and the hepatitis b vaccine aimed at the homosexual population in new york and san francisco . shortly preceding the emergence of hiv aids . ' latest coronavirus research by a team of researchers from nankai university in tianjin lead by professor ruan jishou , a prominent virologist and genomicist , have discovered that the new sars - cov - 2 coronavirus that causes the covid - 19 disease has a mutated gene that is found in hiv virus . it is this unique feature that sets it aside from the rest of the known coronaviruses . ' my inclination here is to suggest that this event is not possibly a natural phenomenon . covid - 19 was unmistakably hatched under laboratory conditions , as the end result of a re - calibrated virus exposed to multiple animal sources , then chemically altered . like that of aids and ebola , this is not a product of nature , or natural selection , but a direct consequence of the forced intervention of man , interrupting and sabotaging the natural life cycle by design . similar to many mutagenic viruses now in circulation , covid - 19 was entirely avoidable . this pattern will only get worse until we put a halt to licensed medical industry malfeasance .