Offshore wind – Van Oord
Climate change and the need to reduce CO2 emissions are drivers for the rising demand of renewable energy sources. With proven experience and an impressive 15-year track record, Van Oord is leading the way in the energy transition towards renewable energy by constructing offshore wind projects. We are the proud builder of the Gemini Offshore Wind Park, one of the largest offshore wind projects in the world. With its 150 wind turbines, it supplies 600 megawatts of renewable energy to 785,000 households.
Turnkey projects
We furnish all-round solutions, often as turnkey projects including engineering, procurement, and construction in order to assume full responsibility for entire projects for our clients. We focus on Balance of Plant contracts (BoP, all supporting components and auxiliary systems other than the wind turbines) and on transport and installation (T&I) projects.
Van Oord aims to expand its current strong position in northwestern Europe. With our innovative solutions, we contribute significantly to making wind energy more competitive. Thanks to our employees’ knowledge and experience, specialised equipment, and the valuable cooperation with partners, we are maintaining our edge in the offshore wind market.
Specialised offshore wind equipment
Our vessels are solid evidence of our Marine ingenuity. With our specialised offshore wind equipment, we remain competitive in the fast-growing offshore wind market. Van Oord’s offshore installation vessel Aeolus, which we designed in-house, is purpose-built to transport and install foundations and offshore wind turbines. Heavy lift installation vessel Svanen is the largest crane vessel in the world, with a lifting capacity of 8,000 tonnes. The Nexus, Van Oord’s first cable-laying vessel, is equipped with a deck layout that was designed and developed in-house to anticipate of future market requirements for challenging cable installation works.
Renewable energy will become increasingly important. Offshore wind plays a major role in this energy transition in North-Western Europe. Thanks to our skilled employees, modern fleet and investments in innovation, we keep offering solutions to our clients and partners for challenges that this expanding market brings along.
Arnoud Kuis, Managing Director of Van Oord Offshore Wind 
Like our clients, Van Oord operates according to the highest Quality, Health, Safety and the Environment (QHSE) standards. Our latest safety programme, say YES to safety, reflects our attitude about working safely.

