herbicide tolerance ( ht ) in gm crops is achieved by the introduction of novel genes . the control of weeds by physical means or by using selective herbicides is time - consuming and expensive ( roller & harlander , 1998 ) . the most widely adopted ht crops are glyphosate tolerant ( dil , cajabob , & padgette , 2008 ) colloquially ( and commercially for monsanto ) known as " roundup ready " crops . herbicide tolerant gm crops have provided farmers with operational benefits . the main benefits associated with ht canola , for example , were easier and better weed control ( mauro & mclachlan , 2008 ) . the development of gm ht canola varieties has also been linked to incremental gains in weed control and canola yield ( harker , blackshaw , kirkland , derksen , & wall , 2000 ) . despite all of the weed management options available in traditional canola , significant incentives remained for the development of ht canola . the most apparent incentives were special weed problems such as false cleavers ( galium aparine ) and stork bill ( erodium cicutarium ) , and the lack of low - cost herbicide treatments for perennial such as quackgrass ( agropyron repens ) and canada thistle ( cirsium arvense ) . mixture of herbicides can control many of the common annual and perennial weeds in western canada but they are expensive and not necessarily reliable ( blackshaw & harker , 1992 ) . in addition , some tank - mixture led to significant canola injury and yield loss ( harker , blackshaw , & kirkland , 1995 ) . thus , canola producers welcomed the prospect of applying a single nonselective herbicide for all weed problems with little concern for specific weed spectrum , growth stages , tank mixture interactions ( i . e . , antagonism or crop injury ) and / or extensive consultation . two major gm ht canola options are widely used in western canada . canola tolerant to glufosinate was the first transgenic crop to be registered in canada ( oelck et al . , 1995 ) . canola tolerant to glyphosate ( roundup ready ) followed shortly thereafter . the gm ht canola offers the possibility of improved weed management in canola via a broader spectrum of weed control and / or greater efficacy on specific weeds ( harker et al . , 2000 ) . the greatest gains in yield attributed to the adoption of gm ht crops has been for soybean in the united states and argentina and for gm ht canola in canada ( brooke & barfoot , 2008 ) .